Tuto contrastive learning (#56)
creatis-myriad/creatis-myriad.github.io: collections/_tutorials/2022-06-20-tutorial_contrastive_learning.md

---
layout: post
title:  "The beauty of contrastive learning: a new step toward efficient unsupervised learning"
author: 'Olivier Bernard'
date:   2022-07-09
categories: contrastive learning, unsupervised learning
---

> 
> # Notes
> 
> * Here is a link to an interesting video to better understand the contrastive learning paradigm: [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IEiytaXnggI&ab_channel=DeepMindELLISUCLCSMLSeminarSeries)
> 

Reviewer: Move the Notes after the table of contents for better illustration. 
```suggestion
```

&nbsp;

- [**Introduction**](#introduction)
- [**SimCLR framework**](#simclr-framework)
  - [Overall scheme](#overall-scheme)
  - [Contrastive loss](#contrastive-loss)
  - [Training tricks](#training-tricks)
  - [Highlights and results](#highlights-and-results)  

&nbsp;

> 

Reviewer: Move the Notes after the table of contents for better illustration. 

```suggestion

# **Notes** <!-- omit in toc -->
* Here is a link to an interesting video to better understand the contrastive learning paradigm: [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IEiytaXnggI&ab_channel=DeepMindELLISUCLCSMLSeminarSeries)

&nbsp;

```

## **Introduction**
The goal of unsupervised-based model is to learn effective representation without human supervision. Most mainstream approaches fall into one of the two classes: generative or discriminative.  

> >> Generative approaches learn to generate samples in the input space, such as GAN [[1]](https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.2661?context=cs). 

Reviewer: > Generative approaches learn to generate samples in the input space, such as GAN [[1]](https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.2661?context=cs).

&nbsp;

## **SimCLR framework**

To illustrate the contrastive learning mechanism, we will study the now famous simple framework for contrastive learning of visual representation, called [SimCLR](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2002.05709.pdf). The corresponding architecture is given below:

![](/collections/images/contrastive_learning/simCLR_overview.jpg)

&nbsp;

### Overall scheme

As illustrated in the figure above, SimCLR comprises four major components: 

* A stochasitc data augmentation module that transforms any given data sample $$x$$ randomly resulting in two correlated views of the same sample, denoted as $$\tilde{x}_i$$ and $$\tilde{x}_j$$ and considered as positive pair. **Random cropping**, **random color distortions** and **random Gaussian blur** are classically combined to transform data samples. 

* A neural network base encoder $$f(\cdot)$$ that extracts representation vectors from augmented data samples. This step can be realized by any standard network architecture, such as ResNet. This step is modeled as follows:

$$h_i = f(\tilde{x}_i)=\texttt{ResNet}(\tilde{x}_i)$$

> &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; where $$h_i \in \mathbb{R}^{d}$$ is the output vector after average pooling layer. 

Reviewer: Missing word. 

```suggestion
&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; where $$h_i \in \mathbb{R}^{d}$$ is the output vector after the average pooling layer. 
```

> * A simple neural network projection head $$g(\cdot)$$ that maps representations to the space where the contrastive loss is applied. A simple MLP with one hidden layer is  used for this step which outputs a vector $$z_i \in \mathbb{R}^{d'}$$ with $$d'=128$$. This allows to project the representation to a 128-dimensional latent space.

Reviewer: Missing word + rephrase
```suggestion
* A simple neural network projection head $$g(\cdot)$$ that maps the representations to the space where the contrastive loss is applied. A simple MLP with one hidden layer is used in this step to output a vector $$z_i \in \mathbb{R}^{d'}$$ with $$d'=128$$. This allows to project the representation to a 128-dimensional latent space.
```

* A contrastive loss function defined for a contrastive prediction task. Given a set of $$\{\tilde{x}_k\}$$ including a positive pair of samples $$\tilde{x}_i$$ and $$\tilde{x}_j$$, the contrastive prediction task aims to identify $$\tilde{x}_j$$ in $$\{\tilde{x}_k\}_{k \neq i}$$ for a given $$\tilde{x}_i$$.

&nbsp;

### Contrastive loss

* A minibatch of $$N$$ samples is randomly selected.

* Each sample is used to create a pair of augmented examples, resulting in $$2N$$ data points.

* For each minibatch, one pair is considered as positive and the others $$2(N-1)$$ as negative examples. 

> * The cosine similarity between two samples $$u$$ and $$v$$ is computed from the conventional dot product $$sim(u,v)=u^{T}v/\left(\|u\|\|v\|\right)$$ . The corresponding value varies between 0 (when u and v are orthogonal) and 1 (when u and v are aligned).

Reviewer: Consistent formatting of u and v.

```suggestion
* The cosine similarity between two samples $$u$$ and $$v$$ is computed from the conventional dot product $$sim(u,v)=u^{T}v/\left(\|u\|\|v\|\right)$$. The corresponding value varies between 0 (when $$u$$ and $$v$$ are orthogonal) and 1 (when $$u$$ and $$v$$ are aligned).
```

> * The following loss function for a positive pair of samples $$(i,j)$$ is defined as:

Reviewer: Rephrase
```suggestion
* The loss function for a positive pair of samples $$(i,j)$$ is defined as:
```

$$l(i,j)=-\log{\left(\frac{ \exp\left(sim(z_i,z_j)/\tau\right) }{ \sum_{k=1}^{2N}{\mathbb{1}_{[k \neq i]}\exp\left(sim(z_i,z_k)/\tau\right) } }\right)}$$

> &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; where $$\mathbb{1}_{[k \neq i]} \in [0,1]$$ is an indicator function evaluating to 1 iff $$k \neq i$$ and $$\tau$$ is a parameter.

Reviewer: Do you mean that $$\mathbb{1}_{[k \neq i]} \in [0,1]$$ = 1 when $$k \neq i$$ ?

```suggestion
&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; where $$\mathbb{1}_{[k \neq i]} \in [0,1]$$ is an indicator function that outputs 1 if $$k \neq i$$ while $$\tau$$ is a parameter.
```

> >> Since both the numerator and denominator involve exponential terms, the values inside the $$-\log(\cdot)$$ function varie between 0 and 1. As a reminder, we display above the corresponding curve. From this figure, on can see that the loss function will tend to its minimum when the numerator and the denominator will be close, i.e. when the set $$\{\exp\left(sim(z_i,z_k)/\tau\right)\}_{[k \neq (i,j)]}$$ will be as low as possible and when $$\exp\left(sim(z_i,z_j)/\tau\right)$$ will be high, making the two points $$z_i$$ and $$z_j$$ to be as close as possible and in the meanwhile the other points to be as orthogonal as possible to these two points. The minimization of the contrastive loss thus allows to structure the latent space according to visual representation.

Reviewer: Typo + rephrase the long sentence.
The figure is below?
```suggestion
>> Since both the numerator and denominator involve exponential terms, the values inside the $$-\log(\cdot)$$ function vary between 0 and 1. As a reminder, the corresponding curve is plotted right below. On this figure, we can see that the loss function tends to its minimum when the numerator and the denominator are close. This means the set $$\{\exp\left(sim(z_i,z_k)/\tau\right)\}_{[k \neq (i,j)]}$$ is as low as possible and $$\exp\left(sim(z_i,z_j)/\tau\right)$$ is high, making the two points $$z_i$$ and $$z_j$$ to be as close as possible while the other points are as orthogonal as possible to these two points. Thus, the minimization of the contrastive loss allows to structure the latent space according to the visual representation.
```

<p align = "center"><img src ="/collections/images/contrastive_learning/minus_log.jpg" alt="Trulli" style="width:40%"></p>

* The final loss is computed across all positive pairs, both $$(i,j)$$ and $$(j,i)$$, in a mini-batch as follows:

$$ \mathcal{L} = \frac{1}{2N} \sum_{k=1}^{N}{ \left[ l(2k-1,2k) + l(2k,2k-1) \right] } $$

&nbsp;

### Training tricks

> * The model was trained at batch size N=4096 for 100 epochs.

Reviewer: Missing words
```suggestion
* The model was trained with a batch size, N=4096 for 100 epochs.
```

> * The training was stabilized thanks to the use of the [LARS](https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.03888) optimizer for all batch sizes.

Reviewer: What do you mean by "for all batch sizes"?
```suggestion
* The training was stabilized thanks to the use of the [LARS](https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.03888) optimizer.
```

> * The model was trained with 128 TPU v3 core.

Reviewer: Typo
```suggestion
* The model was trained with 128 TPU v3 cores.
```

> * It took around 1.5 hours to train a SimCRL model composed of ResNet-50 with a batch size of 4096 for 100 epochs. 

Reviewer: Missing word + remove repetition
```suggestion
* It took around 1.5 hours to train a SimCRL model that composed of a ResNet-50 with the configurations mentionned before. 
```

&nbsp;

### Highlights and results

> * SimCRL achieved results comparable to those of supervised methods but with much more parameters to train !

Reviewer: Rephrase
```suggestion
* SimCRL achieved comparable results to those of supervised methods but with much more parameters to train !
```

<p align = "center"><img src ="/collections/images/contrastive_learning/result_1.jpg" style="width:60%"></p>

> * Composition of data augmentation operation (in particular random cropping and rnadom color distortion) is crucial for learning good representations.

Reviewer: Consistent formatting
```suggestion
* A composition of data augmentation operations (in particular **random cropping** and **random color distortion** ) is crucial for learning good representations.
```

> * Unsupervised contrastive learning benefits more from bigger models than its suerpvised counterpart.

Reviewer: Typos
```suggestion
* Unsupervised contrastive learning benefits more from larger models than its supervised counterpart.
```

> * A nonlinear projection head improves the representation quality of the layer before it !

Reviewer: Remove extra space
```suggestion
* A nonlinear projection head improves the representation quality of the layer before it!
```

> * Normalized cross entropy loss with adjustable temperature works better than alternatives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Normalized cross-entropy loss with adjustable temperature works better than its alternatives.
```

> * Contrastive learning benefits (more) from larger batch sizes and longer training

Reviewer: Missing words
```suggestion
* Contrastive learning benefits (more) from larger batch sizes and longer training epochs.
```
